# useCallback: custom hooks

## ðŸ“ Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/02.md`

I have got some new interesting insights.

### Memoization

1. the memoization can help in these cases:
   1. when some value is being recalculated _on every rerender_ and the calculations are quite expensive
   2. when some function is being called _on every rerender_, e.g. an async call, and the function depends on the input parameters that may vary

   > Note that any function when it is initialized, get a new reference, so it is always new.

2. The caching strategy React has adopted has a size of 1. That is, they only keep around the most recent value of the input and result. If the next call happens with the same input values of dependencies, the result of the previous run will be returned. Otherwise, the calculations will be run again.
3. Be careful when using `useMemo` or `useCallback` as each of them brings extra overhead.
4. `useCallback` is a syntactic sugar around `useMemo` making it more readable to memoize functions. `useMemo` can memoize both. however,  `useCallback` is just a shortcut to using `useMemo` for functions:

	```ts
	// the useMemo version:
	const updateLocalStorage = React.useMemo(
		// useCallback saves us from this annoying double-arrow function thing:
		() => () => window.localStorage.setItem('count', count),
		[count],
	)
	// the useCallback version
	const updateLocalStorage = React.useCallback(
		() => window.localStorage.setItem('count', count),
		[count],
	)
	```

### Workflow with an `asyncFetchCallback` function

1. The `App` component keeps the `pokemonName` in its local state and passes that to `PokemonInfo` component
2. The `PokemonInfo` component is responsible for triggering the fetch via `useAsync` with `asyncFetchCallback` and handling the fetch status.
   1. In case of success, it returns the `PokemonDataView` component for the chosen `pokemon`. This component has no internal logic.
   2. In case of `pending`, it returns a placeholder `PokemonInfoFallback` component
   3. In case of `error`, throws an error that will be caught by the `PokemonErrorBoundary` .
3. The `asyncFetchCallback` function is the last thing that is aware of `pokemon` and its name. It fetches the `pokemon` by `pokemonName` and does it in a callback with `pokemonName` as dependency.
4. The `useAsync` hook accepts the `asyncFetchCallback` as its first parameter and `initialState` as its second one, does the fetch, handles its `state` and returns it to the hook user.
   1. It uses `useReducer` with `asyncReducer` function to update the `state` and uses `initialState` as its default state.
   2. Handling of the `state` takes place inside the `useEffect` block with `asyncFetchCallback` function as its dependency. As we have memoized this function with `useCallback`, `useEffect` will only be triggered if `pokemonName` changes.
   3. First of all, it tries to get the `promise` from the `asyncFetchCallback` function. If it fails, it returns early. Otherwise, it dispatches `pending` action and waits for the result, which triggers either `resolved` or `rejected`.
5. The `asyncReducer` does the actual update of the `state` object in a Redux manner based on the `action` type and data.

### Workflow with a `run` function

So far, we have been memoizing the `asyncFetchCallback` function in our `useAsync` hook. It is fine for us but it would be better if the users of the hook did not have to worry about memoizing. Instead of the user passing the `asyncFetchCallback` function to the hook, we will be returning an extra `run` function back from the hook next to the state. And we will memoize the `run` function with `useCallback` inside the hook.

This function will be returned from the hook and will handle the promise we get from the `fetchPokemon` call. And it will be doing the same job that `useEffect` did.

The `run` function will be memoized by `useCallback` inside the hook. The nice thing is that we don't need any dependencies in the list of dependencies as `dispatch` is the only "variable" that is not being passed as an argument but it cannot change.

### useSafeDispatch

We have been using `dispatch` so far to update the state of our `fetchPokemon` function based on the result of its `promise`. There is one situation, however, which we have not taken care of. That is when the user moves away from the page before the promise resolves. We will then get a warning that we are trying to update the state of the unmounted component.

The solution is to check if the component is still mounted before dispatch in an action. For that we have created a `useSafeDispatch` hook that takes in the "unsafe" dispatch from the `useAsync` hook and returns it back "as is" without any changes but only if the component is mounted.

To check if the component is mounted, the hook creates a `mountedRef` ref object initialized to `false`, and sets its value to `true` when the component is mounted and to `false` when it is unmounted. This happens inside the `useLayoutEffect` hook as we only want to know if the component is mounted. __For that we don't need to wait for the DOM to be painted!__

The `dispatch` function returned from the hook is the memoized by `useCallback` version of the its "safe" version as just described. Its only dependency is the `dispatch` argument we get from the `useAsync` hook which is also stable.



## Background

### Memoization in general

Memoization: a performance optimization technique which eliminates the need to
recompute a value for a given input by storing the original computation and
returning that stored value when the same input is provided. Memoization is a form
of caching. Here's a simple implementation of memoization:

```typescript
const values = {}
function addOne(num: number) {
  if (values[num] === undefined) {
    values[num] = num + 1 // <-- here's the computation
  }
  return values[num]
}
```

One other aspect of memoization is value referential equality. For example:

```typescript
const dog1 = new Dog('sam')
const dog2 = new Dog('sam')
console.log(dog1 === dog2) // false
```

Even though those two dogs have the same name, they are not the same. However,
we can use memoization to get the same dog:

```typescript
const dogs = {}
function getDog(name: string) {
  if (dogs[name] === undefined) {
    dogs[name] = new Dog(name)
  }
  return dogs[name]
}

const dog1 = getDog('sam')
const dog2 = getDog('sam')
console.log(dog1 === dog2) // true
```

You might have noticed that our memoization examples look very similar.
Memoization is something you can implement as a generic abstraction:

```typescript
function memoize<ArgType, ReturnValue>(cb: (arg: ArgType) => ReturnValue) {
  const cache: Record<ArgType, ReturnValue> = {}
  return function memoized(arg: ArgType) {
    if (cache[arg] === undefined) {
      cache[arg] = cb(arg)
    }
    return cache[arg]
  }
}

const addOne = memoize((num: number) => num + 1)
const getDog = memoize((name: string) => new Dog(name))
```

Our abstraction only supports one argument, if you want to make it work for any
type/number of arguments, knock yourself out.

### Memoization in React

Luckily, in React we don't have to implement a memoization abstraction. They
made two for us! `useMemo` and `useCallback`. For more on this read:
[Memoization and React](https://epicreact.dev/memoization-and-react).

You know the dependency list of `useEffect`? Here's a quick refresher:

```javascript
React.useEffect(() => {
  window.localStorage.setItem('count', count)
}, [count]) // <-- that's the dependency list
```

Remember that the dependency list is how React knows whether to call your
callback (and if you don't provide one then React will call your callback every
render). It does this to ensure that the side effect you're performing in the
callback doesn't get out of sync with the state of the application.

But what happens if I use a function in my callback?

```javascript
const updateLocalStorage = () => window.localStorage.setItem('count', count)
React.useEffect(() => {
  updateLocalStorage()
}, []) // <-- what goes in that dependency list?
```

We could just put the `count` in the dependency list and that would
actually/accidentally work, but what would happen if one day someone were to
change `updateLocalStorage`?

```diff
- const updateLocalStorage = () => window.localStorage.setItem('count', count)
+ const updateLocalStorage = () => window.localStorage.setItem(key, count)
```

Would we remember to update the dependency list to include the `key`? Hopefully
we would. But this can be a pain to keep track of dependencies. Especially if
the function that we're using in our `useEffect` callback is coming to us from
props (in the case of a custom component) or arguments (in the case of a custom
hook).

Instead, it would be much easier if we could just put the function itself in the
dependency list:

```javascript
const updateLocalStorage = () => window.localStorage.setItem('count', count)
React.useEffect(() => {
  updateLocalStorage()
}, [updateLocalStorage]) // <-- function as a dependency
```

The problem with that though it will trigger the `useEffect` to run every
render. This is because `updateLocalStorage` is defined inside the component
function body. So it's re-initialized every render. Which means it's brand new
every render. Which means it changes every render. Which means... you guessed
it, our `useEffect` callback will be called every render!

**This is the problem `useCallback` solves**. And here's how you solve it

```javascript
const updateLocalStorage = React.useCallback(
  () => window.localStorage.setItem('count', count),
  [count], // <-- yup! That's a dependency list!
)
React.useEffect(() => {
  updateLocalStorage()
}, [updateLocalStorage])
```

What that does is we pass React a function and React gives that same function
back to us... Sounds kinda useless right? Imagine:

```javascript
// this is not how React actually implements this function. We're just imagining!
function useCallback(callback) {
  return callback
}
```

Uhhh... But there's a catch! On subsequent renders, if the elements in the
dependency list are unchanged, instead of giving the same function back that we
give to it, React will give us the same function it gave us last time. So
imagine:

```javascript
// this is not how React actually implements this function. We're just imagining!
let lastCallback
function useCallback(callback, deps) {
  if (depsChanged(deps)) {
    lastCallback = callback
    return callback
  } else {
    return lastCallback
  }
}
```

So while we still create a new function every render (to pass to `useCallback`),
React only gives us the new one if the dependency list changes.

In this exercise, we're going to be using `useCallback`, but `useCallback` is
just a shortcut to using `useMemo` for functions:

```typescript
// the useMemo version:
const updateLocalStorage = React.useMemo(
  // useCallback saves us from this annoying double-arrow function thing:
  () => () => window.localStorage.setItem('count', count),
  [count],
)

// the useCallback version
const updateLocalStorage = React.useCallback(
  () => window.localStorage.setItem('count', count),
  [count],
)
```

ðŸ¦‰ A common question with this is: "Why don't we just wrap every function in
`useCallback`?" You can read about this in my blog post
[When to useMemo and useCallback](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/usememo-and-usecallback).

ðŸ¦‰ And if the concept of a "closure" is new or confusing to you, then
[give this a read](https://mdn.io/closure). (Closures are one of the reasons
it's important to keep dependency lists correct.)

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/exercise/02.js)
- [Final](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/02.js)

**People tend to find this exercise more difficult,** so I strongly advise
spending some time understanding how the code works before making any changes!

Also, one thing to keep in mind is that React hooks are a great foundation upon
which to build libraries and many have been built. For that reason, you don't
often need to go this deep into making custom hooks. So if you find this one
isn't clicking for you, know that you _are_ learning and when you _do_ face a
situation when you need to use this knowledge, you'll be able to come back and
it will click right into place.

ðŸ‘¨â€ðŸ’¼ Peter the Product Manager told us that we've got more features coming our way
that will require managing async state. We've already got some code for our
pokemon lookup feature (if you've gone through the "React Hooks" workshop
already, then this should be familiar, if not, spend some time playing with the
app to get up to speed with what we're dealing with here). We're going to
refactor out the async logic so we can reuse this in other areas of the app.

**So, your job is** to extract the logic from the `PokemonInfo` component into a
custom and generic `useAsync` hook. In the process you'll find you need to do
some fancy things with dependencies (dependency arrays are the biggest challenge
to deal with when making custom hooks).

NOTE: In this part of the exercise, we don't need `useCallback`. We'll add it in
the extra credits. It's important that you work on this refactor first so
you can appreciate the value `useCallback` provides in certain circumstances.

## Extra Credit

### 1. ðŸ’¯ use useCallback to empower the user to customize memoization

[Production deploy](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/02.extra-1.js)

Unfortunately, the ESLint plugin is unable to determine whether the
`dependencies` argument is a valid argument for `useEffect` which is a shame,
and normally I'd say just ignore it and move on. But, there's another solution
to this problem which I think is probably better.

Instead of accepting `dependencies` to `useAsync`, why don't we just treat the
`asyncCallback` as a dependency? Any time `asyncCallback` changes, we know that
we should call it again. The problem is that because our `asyncCallback` depends
on the `pokemonName` which comes from props, it has to be defined within the
body of the component, which means that it will be defined on every render which
means it will be new every render. This is where `React.useCallback` comes in!

Here's another example of the `React.useCallback` API:

```javascript
function ConsoleGreeting(props) {
  const greet = React.useCallback(
    greeting => console.log(`${greeting} ${props.name}`),
    [props.name],
  )

  React.useEffect(() => {
    const helloGreeting = 'Hello'
    greet(helloGreeting)
  }, [greet])
  return <div>check the console</div>
}
```

The first argument to `useCallback` is the callback you want called, the second
argument is an array of dependencies which is similar to `useEffect`. When one
of the dependencies changes between renders, the callback you passed in the
first argument will be the one returned from `useCallback`. If they do not
change, then you'll get the callback which was returned the previous time (so
the callback remains the same between renders).

So we only want our `asyncCallback` to change when the `pokemonName` changes.
See if you can make things work like this:

```javascript
// ðŸ¨ you'll need to wrap asyncCallback in React.useCallback
function asyncCallback() {
  if (!pokemonName) {
    return
  }
  return fetchPokemon(pokemonName)
}

// ðŸ¨ you'll need to update useAsync to remove the dependencies and list the
// async callback as a dependency.
const state = useAsync(asyncCallback)
```

### 2. ðŸ’¯ return a memoized `run` function from useAsync

[Production deploy](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/02.extra-2.js)

Requiring users to provide a memoized value is fine. You can document it as part
of the API and expect people to just read the docs right? lol, that's hilarious
ðŸ˜‚ It'd be WAY better if we could redesign the API a bit so we (as the hook
developers) are the ones who have to memoize the function, and the users of our
hook don't have to worry about it.

So see if you can redesign this a little bit by providing a (memoized) `run`
function that people can call in their own `useEffect` like this:

```javascript
// ðŸ’° destructuring this here now because it just felt weird to call this
// "state" still when it's also returning a function called "run" ðŸ™ƒ
const {data: pokemon, status, error, run} = useAsync({ status: pokemonName ? 'pending' : 'idle' })

React.useEffect(() => {
  if (!pokemonName) {
    return
  }
  // ðŸ’° note the absence of `await` here. We're literally passing the promise
  // to `run` so `useAsync` can attach it's own `.then` handler on it to keep
  // track of the state of the promise.
  const pokemonPromise = fetchPokemon(pokemonName)
  run(pokemonPromise)
}, [pokemonName, run])
```

### 3. ðŸ’¯ make safeDispatch with useCallback, useRef, and useEffect

[Production deploy](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/02.extra-3.js)

**NOTICE: Things have changed slightly.** The app you're running the exercises
in was changed since the videos were recorded and you can no longer see this
issue by changing the exercise. All the exercises are now rendered in an iframe
on the exercise pages, so when you go to a different exercise, you're
effectively "closing" the page, so all JS execution for that exercise stops.

So I've added a little checkbox which you can use to mount and unmount the
component with ease. This has the benefit of also working on the isolated page
as well. On the exercise page, you'll want to make sure that your console output
is showing the output from the iframe by
[selecting the right context](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/console/reference#context).

I've also added a test for this one to help make sure you've got it right.

Also notice that while what we're doing here is still useful and you'll learn
valuable skills, the warning we're suppressing
[goes away in React v18](https://github.com/reactwg/react-18/discussions/82).

Phew, ok, back to your extra credit!

This one's a bit tricky, and I'm going to be intentionally vague here to give
you a bit of a challenge, but consider the scenario where we fetch a pokemon,
and before the request finishes, we change our mind and navigate to a different
page (or uncheck the mount checkbox). In that case, the component would get
removed from the page ("unmounted") and when the request finally does complete,
it will call `dispatch`, but because the component has been removed from the
page, we'll get this warning from React:

```text
Warning: Can't perform a React state update on an unmounted component. This is a no-op, but it indicates a memory leak in your application. To fix, cancel all subscriptions and asynchronous tasks in a useEffect cleanup function.
```

The best solution to this problem would be to
[cancel the request](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2017/09/abortable-fetch),
but even then, we'd have to handle the error and prevent the `dispatch` from
being called for the rejected promise.

So see whether you can work out a solution for preventing `dispatch` from being
called if the component is unmounted. Depending on how you implement this, you
might need `useRef`, `useCallback`, and `useEffect`.

## ðŸ¦‰ Other notes

### `useEffect` and `useCallback`

The use case for `useCallback` in the exercise is a perfect example of the types
of problems `useCallback` is intended to solve. However the examples in these
instructions are intentionally contrived. You can simplify things a great deal
by _not_ extracting code from `useEffect` into functions that you then have to
memoize with `useCallback`. Read more about this here:
[Myths about useEffect](https://epicreact.dev/myths-about-useeffect).

### `useCallback` use cases

The entire purpose of `useCallback` is to memoize a callback for use in
dependency lists and props on memoized components (via `React.memo`, which you
can learn more about from the performance workshop). The _only_ time it's useful
to use `useCallback` is when the function you're memoizing is used in one of
those two situations.

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%94%A5&e=02%3A%20useCallback%3A%20custom%20hooks&em=).
