# useLayoutEffect: auto-scrolling textarea

## ðŸ“ Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/04.md`

### Main takeaway - React performance

Anytime you have a side effect that's going to manipulate the DOM in a way that's observable to the user, you want to do that in a `useLayoutEffect`.

The only other time that KCD uses `useLayoutEffect` is if he wants to ensure that this callback is called before any other effects are called, like where we were doing that `safeDispatch` and checking the mounted status of our component. We wanted to make sure that that ran before any other effects, and so we used `useLayoutEffect` to ensure that.

To bring it down to a rule,
> You use `useEffect` almost all of the time, and you `useLayoutEffect` if the side effect that you are performing makes an observable change to the DOM that will require the browser to paint that update that you've made.

## Background

There are two ways to tell React to run side-effects after it renders:

1. `useEffect`
2. `useLayoutEffect`

The difference about these is subtle (they have the exact same API), but
significant. 99% of the time `useEffect` is what you want, but sometimes
`useLayoutEffect` can improve your user experience.

To learn about the difference, read
[useEffect vs useLayoutEffect](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/useeffect-vs-uselayouteffect)

And check out the [hook flow diagram](https://github.com/donavon/hook-flow) as
well.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/exercise/04.js)
- [Final](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/04.js)

NOTE: React 18 has smoothed out the differences in the UX between `useEffect`
and `useLayoutEffect`. That said, the simple "rule" described still applies!

There's no exercise for this one because basically you just need to replace
`useEffect` with `useLayoutEffect` and you're good. So you pretty much just need
to experiment with things a bit.

Before you do that though, compare the finished example with the exercise.
Add/remove messages and you'll find that there's a janky experience with the
exercise version because we're using `useEffect` and there's a gap between the
time that the DOM is visually updated and our code runs.

Here's the simple rule for when you should use `useLayoutEffect`:
> If you are making observable changes to the DOM, then it should happen in `useLayoutEffect`, otherwise `useEffect`.

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%94%A5&e=04%3A%20useLayoutEffect%3A%20auto-scrolling%20textarea&em=).
