# useImperativeHandle: scroll to top/bottom

## ðŸ“ Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/05.md`

### Main takeaway

`useImperativeHandle` is useful when the parent component needs to have direct access to some imperative functions on a child component. For that the parent component passes a `ref` to the child component via `React.forwardRef`. Then `useImperativeHandle` attaches a function to that `ref`. This function returns all the imperative methods the parent component needs, e.g., `scrollToTop` and `scrollToBottom`. Now the parent component trigger those methods on a child component at will. KCD warns that we should use this hook sparingly and first try to implement the functionality using declarative function before we use the imperative ones.

In our exercise, we are using it as follows:

```js
React.useImperativeHandle(ref, () => ({ scrollToTop, scrollToBottom }))
```

What it does, is pretty much what the following code does (it actually works!):

```js
React.useLayoutEffect(() => {
	ref.current = {
		scrollToTop,
		scrollToBottom,
	}
})
```

KCD prefers to wrap the function in `React.forwardRef` as it is more readable (but we need to ignore the eslint rule for that):

```js
// eslint-disable-next-line no-func-assign
MessagesDisplay = React.forwardRef(MessagesDisplay)
```

## Background

When we had class components, we could do stuff like this:

```javascript
class MyInput extends React.Component {
  _inputRef = React.createRef()
  focusInput = () => this._inputRef.current.focus()
  render() {
    return <input ref={this._inputRef} />
  }
}

class App extends React.Component {
  _myInputRef = React.createRef()
  handleClick = () => this._myInputRef.current.focusInput()
  render() {
    return (
      <div>
        <button onClick={this.handleClick}>Focus on the input</button>
        <MyInput ref={this._myInputRef} />
      </div>
    )
  }
}
```

The key I want to point out in the example here is that bit above that says:
`<MyInput ref={this._myInputRef} />`. What this does is give you access to the
component instance.

With function components, there is no component instance, so this won't work:

```javascript
function MyInput() {
  const inputRef = React.useRef()
  const focusInput = () => inputRef.current.focus()
  // where do I put the focusInput method??
  return <input ref={inputRef} />
}
```

You'll actually get an error if you try to pass a `ref` prop to a function
component. So how do we solve this? Well, React has had this feature called
`forwardRef` for quite a while. So we could do that:

```javascript
const MyInput = React.forwardRef(function MyInput(props, ref) {
  const inputRef = React.useRef()
  ref.current = {
    focusInput: () => inputRef.current.focus(),
  }
  return <input ref={inputRef} />
})
```

This actually works, however there are some edge case bugs with this approach
when applied in React's future concurrent mode/suspense feature (also it doesn't
support callback refs). So instead, we'll use the `useImperativeHandle` hook to
do this:

```javascript
const MyInput = React.forwardRef(function MyInput(props, ref) {
  const inputRef = React.useRef()
  React.useImperativeHandle(ref, () => {
    return {
      focusInput: () => inputRef.current.focus(),
    }
  })
  return <input ref={inputRef} />
})
```

This allows us to expose imperative methods to developers who pass a ref prop to
our component which can be useful when you have something that needs to happen
and is hard to deal with declaratively.

> NOTE: most of the time you should not need `useImperativeHandle`. Before you
> reach for it, really ask yourself whether there's ANY other way to accomplish
> what you're trying to do. Imperative code can sometimes be really hard to
> follow and it's much better to make your APIs declarative if possible. For
> more on this, read
> [Imperative vs Declarative Programming](https://tylermcginnis.com/imperative-vs-declarative-programming/)

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/exercise/05.js)
- [Final](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/05.js)

For this exercise, we're going to use the simulated chat from the last exercise,
except we've added scroll to top and scroll to bottom buttons. Your job is to
expose the imperative methods `scrollToTop` and `scrollToBottom` on a ref so the
parent component can call those directly.

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%94%A5&e=05%3A%20useImperativeHandle%3A%20scroll%20to%20top%2Fbottom&em=).
